hindsight-docs/docs/developer/index.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
---

# Overview

## Why Hindsight?

AI agents forget everything between sessions. Every conversation starts from zero—no context about who you are, what you've discussed, or what the assistant has learned. This isn't just an implementation detail; it fundamentally limits what AI Agents can do.

**The problem is harder than it looks:**

- **Simple vector search isn't enough** — "What did Alice do last spring?" requires temporal reasoning, not just semantic similarity
- **Facts get disconnected** — Knowing "Alice works at Google" and "Google is in Mountain View" should let you answer "Where does Alice work?" even if you never stored that directly
- **AI Agents need to consolidate knowledge** — A coding assistant that remembers "the user prefers functional programming" should consolidate this into a mental model and weigh it when making recommendations
- **Context matters** — The same information means different things to different memory banks with different personalities

Hindsight solves these problems with a memory system designed specifically for AI agents.

## What Hindsight Does

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph app["<b>Your Application</b>"]
        Agent[AI Agent]
    end

    subgraph hindsight["<b>Hindsight</b>"]
        API[API Server]

        subgraph bank["<b>Memory Bank</b>"]
            direction TB
            MentalModels[Mental Models]
            MemEnt[Memories & Entities]
            Chunks[Chunks]
            Documents[Documents]

            MentalModels --> MemEnt --> Chunks --> Documents
        end
    end

    Agent -->|retain| API
    Agent -->|recall| API
    Agent -->|reflect| API

    API --> bank
```

**Your AI agent** stores information via `retain()`, searches with `recall()`, and reasons with `reflect()` — all interactions with its dedicated **memory bank**

## Key Components

### Memory Types

Hindsight organizes knowledge into facts and consolidated mental models:

| Type | What it stores | Example |
|------|----------------|---------|
| **World** | Objective facts received | "Alice works at Google" |
| **Experience** | Bank's own actions and interactions | "I recommended Python to Bob" |
| **Mental Model** | Consolidated knowledge from facts | "The user prefers functional programming patterns"

### Multi-Strategy Retrieval (TEMPR)

Four search strategies run in parallel:

```mermaid
graph LR
    Q[Query] --> S[Semantic]
    Q --> K[Keyword]
    Q --> G[Graph]
    Q --> T[Temporal]

    S --> RRF[RRF Fusion]
    K --> RRF
    G --> RRF
    T --> RRF

    RRF --> CE[Cross-Encoder]
    CE --> R[Results]
```

| Strategy | Best for |
|----------|----------|
| **Semantic** | Conceptual similarity, paraphrasing |
| **Keyword (BM25)** | Names, technical terms, exact matches |
| **Graph** | Related entities, indirect connections |
| **Temporal** | "last spring", "in June", time ranges |

### Mental Model Consolidation

After memories are retained, Hindsight automatically consolidates related facts into **mental models** — synthesized knowledge representations that capture patterns and learnings:

- **Automatic synthesis**: New facts are analyzed and consolidated into existing or new mental models
- **Evidence tracking**: Each mental model tracks which facts support it
- **Continuous refinement**: Mental models evolve as new evidence arrives

### Disposition Traits

Memory banks have disposition traits that influence reasoning during Reflect:

| Trait | Scale | Low (1) | High (5) |
|-------|-------|---------|----------|
| **Skepticism** | 1-5 | Trusting | Skeptical |
| **Literalism** | 1-5 | Flexible interpretation | Literal interpretation |
| **Empathy** | 1-5 | Detached | Empathetic |

These traits only affect the `reflect` operation, not `recall`.

## Next Steps

### Getting Started
- [**Quick Start**](/developer/api/quickstart) — Install and get up and running in 60 seconds
- [**RAG vs Hindsight**](/developer/rag-vs-hindsight) — See how Hindsight differs from traditional RAG with real examples

### Core Concepts
- [**Retain**](/developer/retain) — How memories are stored with multi-dimensional facts
- [**Recall**](/developer/retrieval) — How TEMPR's 4-way search retrieves memories
- [**Reflect**](/developer/reflect) — How disposition influences reasoning

### API Methods
- [**Retain**](/developer/api/retain) — Store information in memory banks
- [**Recall**](/developer/api/recall) — Search and retrieve memories
- [**Reflect**](/developer/api/reflect) — Reason with disposition
- [**Memory Banks**](/developer/api/memory-banks) — Configure disposition and mission
- [**Documents**](/developer/api/documents) — Manage document sources
- [**Operations**](/developer/api/operations) — Monitor async tasks

### Deployment
- [**Server Setup**](/developer/installation) — Deploy with Docker Compose, Helm, or pip

Commit message:

chore: internal renames (#204)
This commit renames the terminology across the entire codebase:
- "mental models" (fact_type='mental_model' in memory_units) → "observations"
- "reflections" table (stored reflect responses) → "mental_models"

Changes include:
- Database migration to rename tables, indexes, and constraints
- API endpoints: /reflections → /mental-models, /mental-models → /observations
- Config: ENABLE_MENTAL_MODELS → ENABLE_OBSERVATIONS
- Response models and Pydantic classes
- Reflect agent tools and prompts
- Control plane UI and routes
- Documentation and examples
- Regenerated OpenAPI spec and client SDKs (Python, TypeScript)
- Rust CLI: reflection commands → mental-model commands
- LiteLLM: updated fact_types documentation

hindsight-docs/docs/developer/index.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
---

# Overview

## Why Hindsight?

AI agents forget everything between sessions. Every conversation starts from zero—no context about who you are, what you've discussed, or what the assistant has learned. This isn't just an implementation detail; it fundamentally limits what AI Agents can do.

**The problem is harder than it looks:**

- **Simple vector search isn't enough** — "What did Alice do last spring?" requires temporal reasoning, not just semantic similarity
- **Facts get disconnected** — Knowing "Alice works at Google" and "Google is in Mountain View" should let you answer "Where does Alice work?" even if you never stored that directly
- **AI Agents need to consolidate knowledge** — A coding assistant that remembers "the user prefers functional programming" should consolidate this into an observation and weigh it when making recommendations
- **Context matters** — The same information means different things to different memory banks with different personalities

Hindsight solves these problems with a memory system designed specifically for AI agents.

## What Hindsight Does

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph app["<b>Your Application</b>"]
        Agent[AI Agent]
    end

    subgraph hindsight["<b>Hindsight</b>"]
        API[API Server]

        subgraph bank["<b>Memory Bank</b>"]
            direction TB
            Observations[Observations]
            MemEnt[Memories & Entities]
            Chunks[Chunks]
            Documents[Documents]

            Observations --> MemEnt --> Chunks --> Documents
        end
    end

    Agent -->|retain| API
    Agent -->|recall| API
    Agent -->|reflect| API

    API --> bank
```

**Your AI agent** stores information via `retain()`, searches with `recall()`, and reasons with `reflect()` — all interactions with its dedicated **memory bank**

## Key Components

### Memory Types

Hindsight organizes knowledge into facts and consolidated observations:

| Type | What it stores | Example |
|------|----------------|---------|
| **World** | Objective facts received | "Alice works at Google" |
| **Experience** | Bank's own actions and interactions | "I recommended Python to Bob" |
| **Observation** | Consolidated knowledge from facts | "The user prefers functional programming patterns"

### Multi-Strategy Retrieval (TEMPR)

Four search strategies run in parallel:

```mermaid
graph LR
    Q[Query] --> S[Semantic]
    Q --> K[Keyword]
    Q --> G[Graph]
    Q --> T[Temporal]

    S --> RRF[RRF Fusion]
    K --> RRF
    G --> RRF
    T --> RRF

    RRF --> CE[Cross-Encoder]
    CE --> R[Results]
```

| Strategy | Best for |
|----------|----------|
| **Semantic** | Conceptual similarity, paraphrasing |
| **Keyword (BM25)** | Names, technical terms, exact matches |
| **Graph** | Related entities, indirect connections |
| **Temporal** | "last spring", "in June", time ranges |

### Observation Consolidation

After memories are retained, Hindsight automatically consolidates related facts into **observations** — synthesized knowledge representations that capture patterns and learnings:

- **Automatic synthesis**: New facts are analyzed and consolidated into existing or new observations
- **Evidence tracking**: Each observation tracks which facts support it
- **Continuous refinement**: Observations evolve as new evidence arrives

### Disposition Traits

Memory banks have disposition traits that influence reasoning during Reflect:

| Trait | Scale | Low (1) | High (5) |
|-------|-------|---------|----------|
| **Skepticism** | 1-5 | Trusting | Skeptical |
| **Literalism** | 1-5 | Flexible interpretation | Literal interpretation |
| **Empathy** | 1-5 | Detached | Empathetic |

These traits only affect the `reflect` operation, not `recall`.

## Next Steps

### Getting Started
- [**Quick Start**](/developer/api/quickstart) — Install and get up and running in 60 seconds
- [**RAG vs Hindsight**](/developer/rag-vs-hindsight) — See how Hindsight differs from traditional RAG with real examples

### Core Concepts
- [**Retain**](/developer/retain) — How memories are stored with multi-dimensional facts
- [**Recall**](/developer/retrieval) — How TEMPR's 4-way search retrieves memories
- [**Reflect**](/developer/reflect) — How disposition influences reasoning

### API Methods
- [**Retain**](/developer/api/retain) — Store information in memory banks
- [**Recall**](/developer/api/recall) — Search and retrieve memories
- [**Reflect**](/developer/api/reflect) — Reason with disposition
- [**Memory Banks**](/developer/api/memory-banks) — Configure disposition and mission
- [**Documents**](/developer/api/documents) — Manage document sources
- [**Operations**](/developer/api/operations) — Monitor async tasks

### Deployment
- [**Server Setup**](/developer/installation) — Deploy with Docker Compose, Helm, or pip
